# Abstract

One of the most critical challenges in modern urban society is related to traffic management, where too many inefficiencies are leading to unacceptable levels of road congestion, pollution and delays, both for vehicles and pedestrians.
This thesis explores a novel approach to optimize traffic light control, exploiting Deep Re- inforcement Learning (RL) techniques. The goal is to build an RL agent able to dynamically select the optimal traffic light phase and determine the appropriate duration for which to main- tain it, eventually reducing traffic congestion and enhancing the overall traffic flow.
The proposed RL agent has been trained to adapt to varying levels of traffic, ranging from light to moderate and eventually heavy levels of congestion, ensuring a stable and robust be- havior under different scenarios. Additionally, this study analyzes the consequences of using different time intervals for the agent’s action, investigating how this affects the overall system performance. Finally, this study is distinguished from most of the works in the literature for the focus on vulnerable road users, specifically on pedestrians. In this context, during the decision- making process the model takes into consideration both vehicle and pedestrian flows, balancing their needs based on the relative assigned weight. An analysis was conducted on three different weight levels, aiming at finding a trade-off strategy able to ensure fairness of service both to drivers and pedestrians.
The findings will highlight how RL – and specifically Deep RL techniques – provides a promising solution to traffic management, significantly enhancing urban mobility by reducing traffic jams and thus improving the overall experience for all the members involved.
